[[!meta title="Incident and emergency response: what to do in case of fire"]]

This documentation is for sysadmins to figure out what to do when
things go wrong. If you don't have the required accesses and haven't
been trained for such situation, you might be better off just trying
to wake up someone that can deal with them. See the
[[doc/how-to-get-help]] documentation instead.

[[!toc levels=3]]

Specific situations
===================

Server down
-----------

If a server is non-responsive, you can first check if it is actually
reachable over the network:

    ping -c 10 server.torproject.org

If it does respond, you can try to diagnose the issue by looking at
[Nagios][] and/or [Grafana](https://grafana.torproject.org) and analyse what, exactly is going on.

[Nagios]: https://nagios.torproject.org

If it does *not* respond, you should see if it's a virtual machine,
and in this case, which server is hosting it. This information is
available in [[ldap]]
(or [the web interface](https://db.torproject.org/machines.cgi), under the
`physicalHost` field). Then login to that server to diagnose this
issue.

If the physical host is not responding or is empty (in which case it
*is* a physical host), you need to file a ticket with the upstream
provider. This information is available in [Nagios][]: 

 1. search for the server name in the search box
 2. click on the server
 3. drill down the "Parents" until you find something that ressembles
    a hosting provider (e.g. `hetzner-hel1-01` is Hetzner, `gw-cymru`
    is Cymru, `gw-scw-*` are at Scaleway, `gw-sunet` is Sunet)

What follows are per-provider instructions:

### Hetzner robot (physical servers)

 1. Visit the [Heztner Robot server page](https://robot.your-server.de/server) (password in
    `tor-passwords/hosts-extra-info`)
 2. Select the right server (hostname is the second column)
 3. Select the "reset" tab
 4. Select the "Execute an automatic hardware reset" radio button and
    hit "Send". This is equivalent to hitting the "reset" button on a
    computer.
 5. Wait for the server to return for a "few" (2? 5? 10? 20?) minutes,
    depending on how hopeful you are this simple procedure will work.
 6. If that fails, Select the "Order a manual hardware reset" option
    and hit "Send". This will send an actual human to attend the
    server and see if they can bring it back online.

If all else fails, Select the "Support" tab and open a support
request.

### Hetzner Cloud (virtual servers)

 1. Visit the [Hetzner Cloud console](https://console.hetzner.cloud/) (password in
    `tor-passwords/hosts-extra-info`)
 2. Select the project (usually "default")
 3. Select the affected server
 4. Open the console (the `>_` sign on the top right), and see if
    there are any error messages and/or if you can login there (using
    the root password in `tor-passwords/hosts`)
 5. If that fails, attempt a "Power cycle" in the "Power" tab (on the
    left)
 6. If that fails, you can also try to boot a rescue system by
    selecting "Enable Rescue & Power Cycle" in the "Rescue" tab

If all else fails, create a support request. The support menu is in
the "Person" menu on the top right of the page.

### Cymru

Open a ticket by writing <support@cymru.com>.

### Sunet

TBD

Support policies
================

We consider there are three "support levels" for problems that come up
with services:

 * code red: immediate emergency, fix ASAP
 * code yellow: serious problem that doesn't require immediate
   attention but that could turn into a code red if nothing is donw
 * routine: file a bug report, we'll get to it soon!

We do not have 24/7 oncall support, so requests are processed during
work times of available staff. We do try to provide continuous support
as much as possible, but it's possible that some weekends or vacations
are unattended for more than a day. This is the definition of a
"business day".

TPA is responsible for the base service in the operating system, see
the [[service admin definition|doc/admins]] for details on
that.

Debian GNU/Linux is the only supported operating system, and we
support only the "stable" and "oldstable" distributions, until the
latter becomes EOL. We do *not* support Debian LTS. It is the
responsability of service admins to upgrade their services to keep up
with the Debian release schedule.

Code red
--------

A "code red" is a critical condition that requires immediate
action. It's what we consider an "emergency". Our SLA for those is
24h business days, as defined above. Services qualifying for a code
red are:

 * incoming email and forwards
 * [main website](https://www.torproject.org/)
 * [donation website](https://donate.torproject.org/)

Other services fall under "routine" or "code yellow" below, which can
be upgraded in priority.

Examples of problems falling under code red include:

 * website unreachable
 * emails to torproject.org not reaching our server

Some problems fall under other teams and are not the responsability of
TPA, even if they can be otherwise considered a code red.

So, for example, those are *not* code reds for TPA:

 * website has a major design problem rendering it unusable
 * donation backend failing because of a problem in CiviCRM
 * gmail refusing all email forwards
 * encrypted mailing lists failures
 * gitolite refuses connexions

Code yellow
-----------

A "[code yellow](https://devops.com/code-yellow-when-operations-isnt-perfect/)" is a situation where we are overwhelmed but there
isn't exactly an immediate emergency to deal with. A good introduction
is this [SRECON19 presentation](https://www.usenix.org/conference/srecon19americas/presentation/kehoe) ([slides](https://www.usenix.org/sites/default/files/conference/protected-files/sre19amer_slides_kehoe.pdf)). The basic idea is
that a code yellow is a "problem [that] creeps up on you over time and
suddenly the hole is so deep you can’t find the way out".

There's no clear timeline on when such a problem can be resolved. If
the problem is serious enough, it *may* eventually be upgraded to a
code red by the approval of a team lead after a week's delay,
regardless of the affected service. In that case, a "hot fix" (some
hack like throwing hardware at the problem) may be deployed instead of
fixing the actual long term issue, in which case the problem becomes a
code yellow again.

Examples of a code yellow include:

 * Trac gets overwhelmed ([ticket 29672](https://bugs.torproject.org/29672))
 * gitweb performance problems ([ticket 32133](https://bugs.debian.org/32133))
 * upgrade metrics.tpo to buster in the hope of fixing broken graphs
   ([ticket 32998](https://bugs.torproject.org/32998))

Routine
-------

Routine tasks are normal requests that are not an emergency and can be
processed as part of the normal workflow.

Example of routine tasks include:

 * account creation
 * group access changes
 * email alias changes
 * static web component changes
 * examine disk usage warning
 * security upgrades
 * server reboots
