KVM is Linux's [Kernel-based Virtual Machine][] (not to be confused
with a [KVM switch][]. It's the backing mechanism for our
virtualization technologies. This page documents the internals of KVM
and the configuration on some of our older nodes. Newer machines
should be provisioned with [[ganeti]] on top and most documentation
here should not be necessary in day-to-day Ganeti operations.

[KVM switch]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KVM_switch
[Kernel-based Virtual Machine]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kernel-based_Virtual_Machine

Tutorials
=========

Rebooting
---------

Rebooting should be done with a specific procedure, documented in [[upgrades]].

Resizing disks
---------------

To resize a disk, you need to resize the [QCOW2][] image in the parent
host.

Before you do this, however, you might also have some wiggle room
inside the guest itself, inside the LVM physical volume, see the
output of `pvs` and the [[lvm]] cheat sheet.

Once you are sure you need to resize the partition on the host, you
need to use the `qemu-img` command to do the resize.

For example, this will resize (grow!) the image to 50GB, assuming it
was smaller before:

[QCOW2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qcow

    qemu-img resize /srv/vmstore/vineale.torproject.org/vineale.torproject.org-lvm 50G

TODO: do we need to stop the host before this? how about
repartitionning?

To *shrink* an image, you need to use the `--shrink` option but, be
careful: the underlying partitions and filesystems need to first be
resized otherwise you will have data loss.

Note that this only resizes the disk as seen from the VM. The VM
itself might have some partitionning on top of that, and you might
need to do filesystem resizes underneath there, including LVM if
that's setup there as well. See [[lvm]] for details.

Design
======

Disk allocation
---------------

Disks are allocated on a need-to basis on the KVM host, in the
`/srv/vmstore`. Each disk is a file on the host filesystem, and
underneath the guest can create its own partitions. Here is, for
example, `vineale`'s disk which is currently taking 29GiB:

    root@vineale:/srv# df -h /srv
    Sys. de fichiers           Taille Utilisé Dispo Uti% Monté sur
    /dev/mapper/vg_vineale-srv    35G     29G  4,4G  87% /srv

On the parent host, it looks like this:

    root@macrum:~# du -h /srv/vmstore/vineale.torproject.org/vineale.torproject.org-lvm
    29G	/srv/vmstore/vineale.torproject.org/vineale.torproject.org-lvm

ie. only 29GiB is in use. You can also see there's a layer of LVM
volumes inside the guest, so the actual allocation is for 40GiB:

    root@vineale:/srv# pvs
      PV         VG         Fmt  Attr PSize  PFree
      /dev/sdb   vg_vineale lvm2 a--  40,00g 5,00g

That 40GiB size is allocated inside the `QCOW` image:

    root@macrum:~# file /srv/vmstore/vineale.torproject.org/vineale.torproject.org-lvm
    /srv/vmstore/vineale.torproject.org/vineale.torproject.org-lvm: QEMU QCOW Image (v3), 42949672960 bytes

42949672960 bytes is, of course, the 40GiB we see above.
