How to install a new bare metal server at Hetzner
=================================================

This is for setting up physical metal at Hetzner.

Order
-----

 1. get approval for the server, picking the specs from the [main
 website](https://www.hetzner.com/)

 2. head to the [order page](https://robot.your-server.de/order) and pick the right server. pay close
    attention to the location, you might want to put it alongside
    other TPO servers (or not!) depending on redundancy or traffic
    requirements. Click `Add to shopping cart`, leaving all other
    fields as default.

 3. in the `Server login details` page, you should leave `Type` set to
    `Public key`. If you do not recognize your public SSH key in
    there, head to the [server list](https://robot.your-server.de/server) and click on [key
    management](https://robot.your-server.de/key/index) to add your public keys

 4. when you're certain of everything, click `Checkout` in the cart,
    review the order again and click `Order in obligation`.

A confirmation email will be sent by Hetzner at the TPA alias when the
order is filed. Then you wait for the order to complete before being
able to proceed with the install.

Ordering physical servers from Hetzner can be very fast: we've seen 2
minutes turn around times.

Install
-------

At this point you should have received an email from Hetzner with a
subject like:

    Subject: Your ordered SX62 server

It should contain the SSH fingerprint, and IP address of the new host
which we'll use below.

 1. login to the server using the IP address and host key hash
    provided above:

        ssh -o FingerprintHash=md5 -o UserKnownHostsFile=~/.ssh/authorized_keys.hetzner-rescue root@159.69.63.226

    Note: the `FingerprintHash` parameter above is to make sure we
    match the hashing algorithm used by Hetzner in their email, which
    is, at the time of writing, MD5 (!). Newer versions of SSH will
    also encode the hash as base64 instead of hexadecimal, so you
    might want to decode the base64 into the latter using this: The
    `UserKnownHostsFile` is to make sure we don't store the
    (temporary) SSH host key.

        perl -MMIME::Base64 -e '$h = unpack("H*", decode_base64(<>)); $h =~ s/(..)(?=.)/\1:/g; print $h, "\n"'

 2. Set a hostname (short version, not the FQDN):
 
        echo -n 'New hostname: ' && read hn && hostname "$hn" && exec bash

 3. Partition disks. This might vary wildly between hosts, but in
    general, we want:

      * GPT partitionning, with space for a 8MB grub partition and
        cleartext `/boot`
      * software RAID (RAID-1 for two drives, RAID-5 for 3, RAID-10
        for 4)
      * crypto (LUKS)
      * LVM, with separate volume groups for different medium (SSD vs
        HDD)

    We are experimenting with FAI's [setup-storage](https://manpages.debian.org/setup-storage) to partition
    disks instead of rolling our own scripts. You first need to
    checkout the installer's configuration:

            apt install git
            git clone https://git.torproject.org/admin/tsa-misc
            cd tsa-misc/installer
            git show-ref master

    Check that the above hashes match a trusted copy.

    Use the following to setup a Ganeti node, for example:

            apt install fai-setup-storage

            setup-storage -f "disk-config/gnt-fsn" -X

    TODO: convert the other existing `tor-install-format-disks-4HDDs`
    script into a `setup-storage` configuration.

    And finally mount the filesystems:

            . /tmp/fai/disk_var.sh &&
            mkdir /target &&
            mount "$ROOT_PARTITION" /target &&
            mkdir /target/boot &&
            mount "$BOOT_DEVICE" /target/boot

 4. Install the system. This can be done with `grml-debootstrap` which
    will also configure grub, a root password and so on. This should
    get you started, assuming the formatted root disk is mounted on
    `/target` and that the boot device is defined by `$BOOT_DEVICE`
    (populated above by FAI). Note that `BOOT_DISK` is the *disk* as
    opposed to the *partition* which is `$BOOT_DEVICE`.

        BOOT_DISK=/dev/nvme0n1 &&
        ROOTPASSWORD=$(tr -dc 'A-Za-z0-9' < /dev/urandom | head -c 30) &&
        echo "root password: $ROOTPASSWORD" &&
        mkdir -p /target/run && mount -t tmpfs tgt-run /target/run &&
        mkdir /target/run/udev && mount -o bind /run/udev /target/run/udev &&
        apt-get install -y grml-debootstrap && \
        sed -e 's/postfix//;
                s/vlan//;
                s/bridge-utils//;
                s/ifenslave//;
                s/resolvconf//;
                s/zsh//;
                s/strace//;
                s/os-prober//;
                s/bzip2//;
                s/file//;
                s/lsof//;
                s/most//;
                $adbus
                $acryptsetup-initramfs
                ' /etc/debootstrap/packages > /root/grml-packages &&
        mkdir -p /etc/debootstrap/post-scripts/ &&
        cp /root/tsa-misc/installer/tor-install-luks-setup /etc/debootstrap/post-scripts/ &&
        grml-debootstrap --grub "$BOOT_DISK" --target /target \
            --hostname `hostname` --release buster \
            --mirror https://mirror.hetzner.de/debian/packages/ \
            --packages /root/grml-packages \
            --password "$ROOTPASSWORD" \
            --sshcopyid \
            --remove-configs --defaultinterfaces &&
        umount /target/run/udev /target/run

 5. Once the bootstrapping is complete, you still need to make sure
    the system can boot as, the above doesn't (unfortunately)
    configure everything for you. First, make a reasonable etc/fstab:

        sed -e 's/^[[:space:]]*//' > /target/etc/fstab << EOF
        /dev/$vg/root / ext4 errors=remount-ro 0 1
        /dev/md/boot /boot ext4 defaults 0 2

        /dev/$vg/swap none swap sw 0 0
        tmpfs /tmp tmpfs defaults,size=512m 0 0
        EOF

    TODO: take the `fstab` from FAI.

 7. setup dropbear-initramfs to unlock the filesystem on boot. this
    should already have been done by the `tor-install-luks-setup` hook
    deployed in the grml-debootstrap stage, but if not:

        /root/tsa-misc/installer/tor-install-luks-setup /target

    TODO: improve the way that script is deployed.

    TODO: use the FAI keyfiles and set a LUKS passphrase for the first
    disk. For example:

        LUKS_PASSPHRASE=$(tr -dc 'A-Za-z0-9' < /dev/urandom | head -c 30) &&
        echo $LUKS_PASSPHRASE | cryptsetup luksAddKey /dev/md1 --key-file=/tmp/fai/crypt_dev_md1 &&
        echo $LUKS_PASSPHRASE | cryptsetup luksAddKey /dev/md2 --key-file=/tmp/fai/crypt_dev_md2 &&
        cryptsetup luksRemoveKey /dev/md1 --key-file=/tmp/fai/crypt_dev_md1 &&
        cryptsetup luksRemoveKey /dev/md2 --key-file=/tmp/fai/crypt_dev_md2

    ... although that doesn't correctly setup the second disk to use a
    keyfile. 
    
    TODO: Those keyfiles are precious: they could be used to bootstrap
    mandos configuration. Maybe we don't want to `luksRemoveKey` the
    darn thing.
    
    TODO: in an install following the above procedure, a keyfile was
    left unprotected in `/etc`. Make sure we have strong mechanisms to
    avoid that ever happening again. For example:
    
        chmod 0 /etc/luks/
    
    TODO: in any case, move all of the above in the
    `tor-install-luks-setup` hook.

 8. Review the crypto configuration:

        cat /target/etc/crypttab

    If the backing device is *NOT* an SSD, remove the  `,discard` option.

 9. mount the helper filesystems once more

        for fs in dev proc run sys  ; do
          mount -o bind /$fs "/target/$fs";
        done

 10. Do the same with the RAID configuration, probably with something like:

        chroot /target sh -c "/usr/share/mdadm/mkconf > /etc/mdadm/mdadm.conf"

     TODO: move to a deboostrap post hook.

 11. install grub on any secondary disk, for instance

        chroot /target grub-install /dev/nvme1n1

 12. Review the network configuration, since it will end up in the
     installed instance:

         cat /target/etc/network/interfaces

     An example safe configuration is:

         auto lo
         iface lo inet loopback
          
         allow-hotplug eth0
         iface eth0 inet dhcp

     The latter two lines usually need to be added as they are missing
     from Hetzner rescue shells:
    
         cat >> /etc/network/interfaces <<EOF
         
         allow-hotplug eth0
         iface eth0 inet dhcp
         EOF

     TODO: fix this in a post-install debootstrap hook, or in
     grml-debootstrap already, see also [upstream issue 105](https://github.com/grml/grml-debootstrap/issues/105) and
     [issue 136](https://github.com/grml/grml-debootstrap/issues/136).

 13. If any of those latter things changed, you need to regenerate the
    initramfs:

        chroot /target update-initramfs -u
        chroot /target update-grub

 14. umount things:
 
        umount /target/run/udev || true &&
        for fs in dev proc run sys  ; do
            umount /target/$fs || true
        done &&
        umount /target/boot &&
        cd / && umount /target

 15. close things

        vgchange -a n
        cryptsetup luksClose cpv_nvme
        mdadm --stop /dev/md*

 16. Document the LUKS passphrase and root password in `tor-passwords`

 17. Cross fingers and reboot:

        reboot

Configuration
-------------

See [[new-machine]] for post-install configuration steps, then
follow [[new-machine-mandos]] for setting up the mandos client on this host.
