Dealing with OpenStack
======================

We were granted access to Linaro's OpenStack cluster.

Preparation
-----------

You first need a `adminrc.sh` file with the right configuration and
credentials. That is stored in [ticket 453](https://servicedesk.linaro.org/servicedesk/customer/portal/11/DC-453) at Linaro and the
password prompted is the `login.linaro.org` SSO password stored in
`tor-passwords.git`.

Then you need to install some OpenStack clients:

    apt install openstack-clients

Yes, that installs 74 packages, no kidding.

Add your SSH key to the server:

    openstack keypair create --public-key=~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub anarcat

You will need to create a floating IP if the server is to be public:

    openstack floating ip create ext-net

The network name (`ext-net` above) can be found in the network list:
    
    openstack network list

The IP address will be shown in the output:
    
    | floating_ip_address | 213.146.141.28 |

You'll also need to link the router in the private network if not
already done:
    
    openstack router add subnet router-tor 7452852a-8b5c-43f6-97f1-72b1248b2638

The subnet UUID comes from the `Subnet` column in the output of
`openstack network list` for the "internal network" (the one that is
not `ext-net`.

During this entire process, it's useful to take a look at the effect
of the various steps through the web interface:

<https://uk.linaro.cloud/>

The commandline instructions are provided below because they are
easier to document. But an equivalent can be followed through the web
interface as well.

Launching an instance
---------------------

This procedure will create a new VM in the OpenStack cluster. Make
sure you first source the `adminrc.sh` script you found in the
previous step.

 1. list the known flavors and images:
 
        openstack flavor list
        openstack image list

    let's say we deploy a `uk.nano` flavor with
    `debian-10-openstack-arm64` image. 

 2. create the server (known as an "instance" in the GUI):
 
        openstack server create --key-name=anarcat --security-group=torproject-admin@torproject.org-security-group --image=debian-10-openstack-arm64 --flavor=uk.nano build-arm-10.torproject.org

    In the above:
    
     * `--keypair=anarcat` refers to the keypair created in the
       preparation
     * `--security-group` is taken from the first non-`default` line
       in the `openstack security group list` output
     * `--image` and `--flavor` were picked from the previous step

 3. you can see the status of the process with:
 
        openstack server list

 4. then map the floating IP address to the server:

        openstack server add floating ip build-arm-10.torproject.org 213.146.141.28

    The floating IP is the one created at step two and the other
    argument is the server name.

 5. the VM should be up by now, and you should be able to SSH in:
 
        openstack server ssh -l debian build-arm-10.torproject.org

    You unfortunately have to blindly TOFU (Trust On First Use) the
    SSH server's public key because it's not visible in the API or web
    interface. The `debian` user has `sudo` access.

References
==========

 * [How to launch an instance](https://docs.openstack.org/install-guide/launch-instance.html)
