Agenda:

 * What has everyone been up to
 * What we're up to in April
 * Other discussions
 * Next meeting

[[!toc levels=2]]

What has everyone been up to
============================

anarcat
-------

 1. lots of onboarding work, mostly complete
 2. learned a lot of stuff
 3. prometheus research and deployment as munin replacement, mostly
    complete
 4. started work on puppet code cleanup for public release

lots more smaller things:

 5. deployed caching on vineale to fix load issues
 6. silenced lots of cron job and nagios warnings, uninstalled logwatch
 7. puppet run monitoring, batch job configurations with cumin
 8. moly drive replacement help
 9. attended infracon 2019 meeting in barcelona (see report on ML)

hiro
----

 1. website redesign and deploy
 2. gettor refactoring and test
 3. on vacation for about 1 week
 4. IFF last week
 5. many small maintenance things

ln5
---

 1. nextcloud evaulation setup [wrapping up the setup]
 2. gitlab vm [complete]
 3. trying to move "put donated hw in use" forward [stalled]
 4. onboarding [mostly done i think]

weasel
------

 1. brulloi decommissionning [continued] 
 2. worked on getting encrypted VMs at hetzner
 3. first buster install for Mandos, made a buster dist on db.tpo,
    cleaned up the makefile
 4. ... which required rotating our CAs
 5. security updates
 6. everyday fixes

What we're up to in April
=========================

anarcat
-------

 1. finishing the munin replacement with grafana, need to write some
    dashboards and deploy some exporters (trac #30028). not doing
    Nagios replacement in short term.
 2. puppet code refactoring for public release (trac #29387)
 3. hardware / cost inventory (trac #29816)

hiro
----

 1. community.tpo launch
 2. followup on tpo launch
 3. replace gettor with the refactored version
 4. usual small things: blog/git...

ln5
---

 1. nextcloud evaluation on Riseup server
 2. whatever people need help with?

weasel
------

 1. buster upgrades
 2. re-encrypt hetzner VMs
 3. finish brulloi decommissionning, canceled for april 25th
 4. mandos monitoring
 5. move spreadsheets from Google to Nextcloud

Other discussion topics
=======================

Nextcloud status
----------------

We are using Riseup's Nextcloud as a test instance for replacing Google
internally. Someone raised the question fo backups and availability: it
was recognized that it's possible Riseup might be less reliable than
Google, but that wasn't seen as a big limitation. The biggest concern is
whether we can meaningfully backup the stuff that is hosted there,
especially with regards to how we could migrate that data away in our
own instance eventually.

For now we'll treat this as being equivalent to Google in that we're
tangled into the service and it will be hard to migrate away but the
problem is limited in scope because we are testing the service only with
some parts of the team for now.

Weasel will migrate our Google spreadsheets to the Nextcloud for now and
we'll think more about where to go next.

Gitlab status
-------------

Migration has been on and off, sometimes blocked on TPA giving access
(sudo, LDAP) although most of those seem to be resolved. Expecting
service team to issue tickets if new blockers come up.

Not migrating TPA there yet, concerns about fancy reports missing from 
new site.

Prometheus third-party monitoring
---------------------------------

Two tickets about monitoring external resources with Prometheus (#29863
and #30006). Objections raised to monitoring third party stuff with the
core instance so it was suggested to setup a separate instance for
monitoring infrastructure outside of TPO.

Concerns also expressed about extra noise on Trac about that instance,
no good solution for Trac generated noise yet, there are hopes that
GitLab might eventually solve that because it's easier to create Gitlab
projects than Trac components.

Next meeting
============

May 6, 2019, 1400UTC

Meeting concluded within the planned hour. Notes for next meeting:

 1. first item on agenda should be the roll call
 2. think more about the possible discussion topics to bring up
    (prometheus one could have been planned in advance)
