[[!toc levels=2]]

# Roll call: who's there and emergencies

Present:

 * anarcat
 * hiro
 * weasel

ln5 announced he couldn't make it.

# What has everyone been up to

## Hiro

 * websites (Again)
 * dip.tp.o setup finished
 * usual maintenance stuff

## Weasel

 * upgraded to buster bungei and hetzner-hel1-02 (also reinstalled
   with an encrypted /), post-install config now all in Puppet, both
   booting via Mandos now
 * finished brulloi retirement, billing cleared up and back at the
   expected monthly rate
 * moved the hetzner kvm host list from google drive to NC and made a
   TPA calendar in NC
 * noticed issues with NC: no confitional formatting, TPA group not
   available in calendar app, no per calendar timezone option

## Anarcat

 * prometheus + grafana completed: tweaked last dashboards and
   exporters, rest of the job is in my backlog
 * merge of Puppet Prometheus module patches upstream continued
 * cleaned up remaining traces of munin in Puppet
 * Hiera migration about 50% done
 * hardware / cost inventory in spreadsheet (instead of Hiera, [Trac
   29816](https://bugs.torproject.org/29816))
 * misc support things ("break the glass" on a mailing list, notably,
   documented [WebDAV + Nextcloud + 2FA](https://trac.torproject.org/projects/tor/wiki/org/operations/Infrastructure/NextCloud#Desktopsupport) operation)

# What we're up to next

## Hiro

 * community portal website
 * document how to contribute to websites
 * moving websites from Trac to Dip (just the git part), as separate
   projects (see [web](https://dip.torproject.org/web))
 * Grafana inside Docker
 * more Puppet stuff

## Weasel

 * replace textile with newer hardware
 * test smaller MTUs on Hetzner vswitch stuff to see if it would work
   for publicly routed addresses
 * more buster upgrades

## Anarcat

 * upstream merge of puppet code
 * hiera migration completion, hopefully
 * 3rd party monitoring server setup, blocked on approval
 * grafana tor-guest auth
 * pick up team lead role formally (more meetings, mostly)
 * log host?

# Transfering ln5's temporary lead role to anarcat

This point on the agenda was a little awkward because ln5 wasn't
here to introduce it, but people felt comfortable going anyways, so we
did. 

First, some context: ln5 had taken on the "team lead" (from TPI's
perspective) inside the nascent "sysadmin team" last November. He
didn't want to participate in the vegas team meetings because he was
only part time and it would not make sense to take like a fifth of his
time in meetings. The team has been mostly leaderless so far, although
weasel did serve as a de-facto leader because he was the most
busy. Then ln5 showed up and became the team leader.

But now that anarcat is there full time, it may make sense to have a
team lead in those meetings and delegate that responsability from ln5
to anarcat. This was discussed during the hiring process and anarcat
was open to the idea. For anarcat, leadership is not telling people
what to do, it's showing the way and summarizing, helping people do
things.

Everyone supported the change. If there are problems with the move,
there are resources in TPI (HR) and the community (CC) to deal with
those problems, and they should be used. In any case, talk with
anarcat if you feel there are problems, he's open. He'll continue
using ln5 as a mentor.

We don't expect much changes to come out of this, as anarcat has
already taken on some of that work (like writing those minutes and
coordinating meetings). It's possible more things come up from the
Vegas team or we can bring them down issues as well. It could help us
unblock funding problems, for example. In any case, anarcat will keep
the rest of the team in the loop, of course. Hiro also had some
exchanges with ln5 about formalizing her work in the team, which
anarcat will followup on.

# Hardware inventory and followup

There's now a spreadsheet in Nextcloud that provides a rough inventory
of the machines. It used to be only paid hardware hosting virtual
machines, but anarcat expanded this to include donated hardware in the
hope to get a clearer view of the hardware we're managing. This should
allow us to better manage the life cycle of machines, depreciation and
deal with failures.

The spreadsheet was originally built to answer the "which machine do
we put this new VM on" question and since `moly` was already too full
and old by the time the spreadsheet was created, there was no sheet
for `moly`. So anarcat added a sheet for `moly` and also entries for
the VMs in Hetzner cloud and Scaleway to get a better idea of the
costs and infrastructure present. There's also a
"per-hosting-provider" sheet that details how much we pay to each
entity.

The spreadsheet should *not* provide a full inventory of all machines:
this is better served by LDAP or Hiera (or both), but it *should*
provide an inventory of all "physical" hosts we have (e.g. `moly`) or
the VMs that we do not control the hardware underneath
(e.g. `hetzner-nbg1-01`).

Some machines were identified as missing from the spreadsheet:

 * ipnet/sunet cloud
 * nova
 * listera
 * maybe others

Next time a machine is setup, it *should* generally be added to that
sheet in some sense or another. If it's a standalone VM we do not
control the host of (e.g. in Hetzner cloud), it goes in the first
sheet. If it's a new KVM host, it desserves its own sheet, and if it's
a VM in one of our hosts, it should be added to that host's sheet.

WThe spreadsheet has been useful to figure out "where do we put that
stuff now", but it's also useful for "where is that stuff and what
stuff do we need next".

# Other discussions

None identified.

# Next meeting

[June 3 2019, 1400UTC](2019-06-03), in the Nextcloud / CalDAV calender.
