[[!toc levels=2]]

# Roll call: who's there and emergencies
# What has everyone been up to

## anarcat

 * blog service damage control (#32090)
 * new caching service (#32239)
 * try to kick cymru back into life (#29397)
 * jabber service shutdown (#31700)
 * prometheus/ipsec reliability issues (#31916)
 * bumped prometheus retention to 5m/365d, bumped back to 1m/365d after i realized it broke the graphs (#31244)
 * LDAP sudo transition (#6367)
 * finished director replacement (#31786)
 * archived public SVN (#15948)
 * shutdown SVN internal (#15949)
 * fix "ping on new VMs" bug on ganeti hosts (#31781)
 * review Fastly contracts and contacts
 * became a blog maintainer (#23007)
 * clarified hardware donation policy in FAQ (#32044)
 * tracking major upgrades progress (fancy graphs!), visible at https://help.torproject.org/tsa/howto/upgrades/ - current est: june 2020
 * joined a call with giant rabbit about finances, security and cost, hiro also talked with them about upgrading their CiviCRM, some downtimes to be announced soon-ish
 * massive (~20%) trac ticket cleanup in the "trac" component
 * daily grind: email aliases, pgp key updates, full disks, security upgrades, reboots, performance problems
 * worked sysadmin onboarding process docs (ticket #29395)
 * drafted a template for service documentation in https://help.torproject.org/tsa/howto/template/

# What we're up to next

## anarcat

New:

 * caching server launch and followup, missing stats (#32239)

Continued/stalled:

 * followup on SVN shutdown, only corp missing (#17202)
 * upstreaming ganeti installer fix and audit of the others (#31781)
 * followup with email services improvements (#30608)
 * followup on SVN decomissionning (#17202)
 * send root@ emails to RT (#31242)
 * continue prometheus module merges

# Other discussions
# Next meeting

