# Roll call: who's there and emergencies

anarcat, hiro, gaba, qbi present

# What has everyone been up to

## anarcat

* unblocked hardware donations ([#29397](https://bugs.torproject.org/29397))
* finished investigation of the onionoo performance, great team work
  with the metrics led to significant optimization
* summarized the blog situation with hiro ([#32090](https://bugs.torproject.org/32090))
* ooni load investigation ([#32660](https://bugs.torproject.org/32660))
* disk space issues for metrics team ([#32644](https://bugs.torproject.org/32644))
* more puppet code sync with upstream, almost there
* built test server for mail service, R&D postponed to january
  ([#30608](https://bugs.torproject.org/30608))
* postponed DMARC mailing list fixes to january ([#29770](https://bugs.torproject.org/29770))
* dealt with major downtime at moly, which mostly affected the
  translation server (majus), good contacts with cymru staff
* dealt with kvm4 crash ([#32801](https://bugs.torproject.org/32801)) scheduled decom ([#32802](https://bugs.torproject.org/32802))
* deployed ARM VMs on Linaro openstack
* gitlab meeting
* untangled monitoring requirements for anti-censorship team ([#32679](https://bugs.torproject.org/32679))
* finalized iranicum decom ([#32281](https://bugs.torproject.org/32281))
* went on two week vacations
* automated install solutions evaluation and analysis ([#31239](https://bugs.torproject.org/31239))
* got approval for using emergency ganeti budget
* usual churn: sponsor Lektor debian package, puppet merge work, email
  aliases, PGP key refreshes, metrics.tpo server mystery crash
  ([#32692](https://bugs.torproject.org/32692)), DNSSEC rotation, documentation, OONI DNS, NC DNS, etc

## hiro
* Tried to debug what's happening on gitlab
  (a.k.a. dip.torproject.org)
* Usual maintenance and upgrades to services (dip, git, ...)
* Run security updates
* summarized the blog situation ([#32090](https://bugs.torproject.org/32090)) with anarcat. Fixed the blog
  template
* [www updates](https://dip.torproject.org/torproject/web/www-monthly/blob/master/2019-12.md)
* Issue with KVM4 not coming back after reboot ([#32801](https://bugs.torproject.org/32801))
* Following up for the anticensorhip team monitoring issues ([#31159](https://bugs.torproject.org/31159))
* Working on [nagios checks for bridgedb](https://dip.torproject.org/torproject/anti-censorship/roadmap/issues/6)
* Oncall during xmas

## qbi

* disabled some trac components
* deleted a mailing list
* created a new mailing list
* tried to familiarize with puppet API queries

# What we're up to next

## anarcat

Probably too ambitious...

New:

 * varnish -> nginx conversion? ([#32462][])
 * review cipher suites? ([#32351][])
 * publish our puppet source code ([#29387][])
 * setup extra ganeti node to test changes to install procedures and especially setup-storage
 * kvm4 decom ([#32802](https://bugs.torproject.org/32802))
 * install automation tests and refactoring ([#31239](https://bugs.torproject.org/31239))
 * SLA discussion (see below, [#31243](https://bugs.torproject.org/31243))

[#32462]: https://bugs.torproject.org/32462
[#32351]: https://bugs.torproject.org/32351
[#31239]: https://bugs.torproject.org/31239
[#29387]: https://bugs.torproject.org/29387

Continued/stalled:

 * followup on SVN shutdown, only corp missing ([#17202][])
 * audit of the other installers for ping/ACL issue ([#31781][])
 * email services R&D ([#30608][])
 * send root@ emails to RT ([#31242][])
 * continue prometheus module merges

[#17202]: https://bugs.torproject.org/17202
[#31781]: https://bugs.torproject.org/31781
[#30608]: https://bugs.torproject.org/30608
[#31242]: https://bugs.torproject.org/31242

## Hiro

* Updates || migration for the CRM and planning future of donate.tp.o
* Lektor + styleguide documentation for GR
* Prepare for blog migration
* Review build process for the websites
* Status of monitoring needs for the anti-censorship team
* Status of needrestart and automatic updates ([#31957](https://bugs.torproject.org/31957))
* Moving on with dip or find out why is having these issues with MRs

## qbi

 * DMARC mailing list fixes ([#29770](https://bugs.torproject.org/29770))

# Server replacements

The recent crashes of kvm4 ([#32801](https://bugs.torproject.org/32801)) and moly ([#32762](https://bugs.torproject.org/32762)) have
been scary (e.g. mail, lists, jenkins, puppet and LDAP all went away,
translation server went down for a good while). Maybe we should focus
our energies on more urgent server replacements, that is specifically
kvm4 ([#32802](https://bugs.torproject.org/32802)) and moly ([#29974](https://bugs.torproject.org/29974)) for now, but eventually all
old KVM hosts should be decommissisoned.

We have some budget to expand the Ganeti setup, let's push this ahead
and assign tasks and timelines.

Consider we need a new VM for GitLab and CRM machines, among other
projects.

Timeline:

 1. end of week: setup fsn-node-03 (anarcat)
 2. end of january: setup duplicate CRM nodes and test FS snapshots
    (hiro)
 2. end of january: kvm1/textile migration to the cluster and shutdown
 3. end of january: rabbits test new CRM setup and upgrade tests?
 4. mid february: CRM upgraded and boxes removed from kvm3?
 5. end of Q1 2020: kvm3 migration and shutdown, another gnt-fsn node?

We want to streamline the KVM -> Ganeti migration process.

We might need extra budget to manage the parallel hosting of gitlab
and git.tpo and trac. It's a key blocker in the kvm3 migration, in
terms of costs.

# Oncall policy

We need to answer the following questions:

 1. How do users get help? (partly answered by
    <https://help.torproject.org/tsa/doc/how-to-get-help/>)
 2. What is an emergency?
 3. What is supported?

(This is part of [#31243](https://bugs.torproject.org/31243).)

From there, we should establish how we provide support for those
machines without having to be oncall all the time. We could equally
establish whether we should setup rotation schedules for holidays, as
a general principle.

Things generally went well during the vacations for hiro and arma, but
we would like to see how to better handle this during the next
vacations. We need to think about how much support we want to offer
and how.

Anarcat will bring the conversation with vegas to see how we define
the priorities, and we'll make sure to better balance the next
vacation.

# Other discussions

N/A.

# Next meeting

Feb 3rd.
