This document is manually synchronized regularly between <https://help.torproject.org/tsa/roadmap/2020/> and <https://pad.riseup.net/p/CYOUx21kpxLL_5Eui61J-tpa-roadmap-2020>. Keep the format in markdown for now. It should eventually be moved into Trac keywords.

[[!toc]]

Introduction
============

This page documents a possible roadmap for the TPA team for the year 2020.

Items should be "SMART" <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SMART_criteria>, that is:

 * specific
 * measurable
 * achievable
 * relevant
 * time-bound

DEPRECATED (only to be able to have gaba's notes on the roadmap)

TODO
----

 * nextcloud roadmap
 * identify critical services and realistic improvements #31243
 * (anarcat & gaba) sort out each month by priority
 * (gaba) add keywords #tpa-roadmap- for each month
 * (anarcat) create tickets for what it doesnt have tickets
 * (at tpa meeting) estimate tickets! (1pt = 1 day)
 * (gaba) reorganize budget file per month https://nc.torproject.net/apps/onlyoffice/7374?filePath=%2FTeams%2FSysadmin%2FBudget%20Sysadmin.xlsx
 * (gaba) create a roadmap for gitlab migration
 * (gaba) find service admins for gitlab (nobody for trac in https://trac.torproject.org/projects/tor/wiki/org/operations/services ) - gaba to talk with isa and alex and look for service admins
   * have a shell account in the server
   * restart/stop service
   * upgrade services
   * problems with the service

Main objectives (need to have):

 * decommissining of old machines (moly in particular)
 * move critical services in ganeti
 * buster upgrades before LTS
 * within budget

Secondary objectives (nice to have):

 * new mail service
 * conversion of the kvm* fleet to ganeti for higher reliability and availability
 * buster upgrade completion before anarcat vacation

Non-objective:

 * service admin roadmapping?
 * kubernetes cluster deployment?

Assertions:

 * new gnt-fsn nodes with current hardware (PX62-NVMe, 118EUR/mth), cost savings possible with the AX line (-20EUR/mth) or by reducing disk space requirements (-39EUR/mth) per node
 * cymru actually delivers hardware and is used for moly decom
 * gitlab hardware requirements covered by another budget
 * we absorb the extra bandwidth costs from the new hardware design (currently 38EUR per month but could rise when new bandwidth usage comes in) - could be shifted to TBB team or at least labeled as such

January
=======

 * [x] catchup after holidays
 * [x] agree internally on a roadmap for 2020
 * [x] first phase of installer automation (setup-storage and friends) #31239
 * [x] new FSN node in the Ganeti cluster (fsn-node-03) #32937
 * [ ] textile shutdown and VM relocation, 2 VMs to migrate #31686 (+86EUR) IN PROGRESS
 * [ ] enable needrestart fleet-wide (#31957) CHECK-WITH-HIRO
 * [ ] review website build errors CHECK-WITH-HIRO
 * [ ] evaluate if discourse can be used as comments platform for the blog CHECK-WITH-HIRO
 * [ ] communicate buster upgrade timeline to service admins IN PROGRESS
 * [x] buster upgrade 63% done: 48 buster, 28 stretch machines

February
========

<https://trac.torproject.org/projects/tor/query?status=!closed&keywords=~tpa-roadmap-february>

 * 2020 roadmap officially adopted
 * second phase of installer automation #31239 (esp. puppet automation, e.g. #32901, #32914)
 * new gnt-fsn node (fsn-node-04) -118EUR=+40EUR (#33081)
 * storm shutdown #32390
 * unifolium decom (after storm), 5 VMs to migrate, #33085 +72EUR=+158EUR
 * buster upgrade 70% done: 53 buster (+5), 23 stretch (-5)
 * migrate gitlab-01 to a new VM (gitlab-02) and use the omnibus package instead of ansible (#32949)
 * migrate CRM machines to gnt and test with Giant Rabbit #32198 (priority)
 * automate upgrades: enable unattended-upgrades fleet-wide (#31957)
 * anti-censorship monitoring (external prometheus setup assistance) #31159

March
=====

<https://trac.torproject.org/projects/tor/query?status=!closed&keywords=~tpa-roadmap-march>

High possibility of overload here (two major decoms and many machines setup). Possible to push moly/cymru work to april?

 * 2021 budget proposal?
 * possible gnt-cymru cluster setup (~6 machines) #29397
 * moly decom #29974, 5 VMs to migrate
 * kvm3 decom, 7 VMs to migrate (inc. crm-int and crm-ext), #33082 +72EUR=+112EUR
 * new gnt-fsn node (fsn-node-05) #33083 -118EUR=-6EUR
 * eugeni VM migration to gnt-fsn #32803
 * buster upgrade 80% done: 61 buster (+8), 15 stretch (-8)
 * solr deployment
 * anti-censorship monitorining (external prometheus setup assistance) #31159
 * nc.riseup.net cleanup #32391
 * SVN shutdown? #17202

April
=====

 * kvm4 decom, 9 VMs to migrate #32802 (w/o eugeni), +121EUR=+115EUR
 * new gnt-fsn node (fsn-node-06) -118EUR=-3EUR
 * buster upgrade 90% done: 68 buster (+7), 8 stretch (-7)
 * solr configuration

May
===

 * kvm5 decom, 9 VMs to migrate #33084, +111EUR=+108EUR
 * new gnt-fsn node (fsn-node-07) -118EUR=-10EUR
 * buster upgrade 100% done: 76 buster (+8), 0 stretch (-8)
 * current planned completion date of Buster upgrades
 * start ramping down work, training and documentation
 * solr text updates and maintenance

June
====

 * Debian jessie LTS EOL, chiwui forcibly shutdown #29399
 * finish ramp-down, final bugfixing and training before vacation
 * search.tp.o soft launch

July
====

 * Debian stretch EOL, final deadline for buster upgrades
 * anarcat vacation
 * tor meeting?
 * hiro tentative vacations

August
======

 * anarcat vacation
 * web metrics R&D (investigate a platform for web metrics) <-- is this a priority? CHECK WITH HIRO?

September
=========

 * plan contingencies for christmas holidays
 * catchup following vacation
 * web metrics deployment

October
=======

 * puppet work (finish prometheus module development, puppet environments, trocla, Hiera, publish code #29387)
 * varnish to nginx conversion #32462
 * web metrics soft launch (in time for eoy campaign)
 * submit service R&D #30608


November
========

 * first submit service prototype? #30608

December
========

 * stabilisation & bugfixing
 * 2021 roadmapping
 * one or two week xmas holiday
 * CCC?

2021 preview
============

Objectives:

 * complete puppetization
 * experiment with containers/kubernetes?
 * close and merge more services
 * replace nagios with prometheus? #29864
 * new hire?

Monhtly goals:

 * january: roadmap approval
 * march/april: anarcat vacation

